[JEP-1] - Rework the JEP review process and sponsor/BDFL Delegate ter… (#359)
jenkinsci/jep: jep/1/README.adoc

> 

Reviewer: If BDFL has no responsibilities, do we even need to keep the role?   

No offence intended to Kohsuke, but why have a role defined for this process that has no active role in this process?

Author: I have contacted KK several days ago about the future of the BDFL role. Just FYI, pending discussion

One contributor might do only one or any combination of these
of these things during any part of the life of a JEP.
While we invite contributions by companies or other organizations, contributors listed in a JEP
(such as Champions or Advisors below) need to be specific people.
The final decision may be made by a group of contributors,
e.g. by the Jenkins community or another community entity.

==== Jenkins community

The _Jenkins community_ term represents all community members,
regardless of whether they contribute to a particular JEP or not.
The Jenkins community makes decisions about JEPs according to the process defined in the
link:https://www.jenkins.io/project/governance[Jenkins Governance Document].
As long as the process is followed,
accepting or rejecting a JEP is considered a community decision.
The Jenkins community can also delegate the decision to another community entity or individual contributor,

> hence the "Reviewer" term is used for the review process (see below).

Author: The Jenkins community decision making process is to be explicitly documented on the Governance Page. I am working on a pull request. And thanks for the text patch!

One contributor might do only one or any combination of these
of these things during any part of the life of a JEP.
While we invite contributions by companies or other organizations, contributors listed in a JEP
(such as Champions or Advisors below) need to be specific people.
The final decision may be made by a group of contributors,
e.g. by the Jenkins community or another community entity.

==== Jenkins community

The _Jenkins community_ term represents all community members,
regardless of the degree to which they contribute to a particular JEP.
The Jenkins community consists of anyone who contributes to improving the Jenkins or the Jenkins community.
The community is not a single homogenous entity, but rather a group of individuals with a common interest.  
The community makes decisions on most topics including JEPs based on the general consensus of all interested members of the Jenkins community following the philosophy defined in the

> link:https://www.jenkins.io/project/governance[Jenkins Governance Document] and the [Jenkins Code of Conduct](https://www.jenkins.io/project/conduct/).

Reviewer: Oops my bad here:
```suggestion
link:https://www.jenkins.io/project/governance[Jenkins Governance Document] and the
link:https://www.jenkins.io/project/conduct[Jenkins Code of Conduct].
```

and that the decision making process is followed. 
JEP Advisor may or may not participate in the reviews and implementation of the JEP.

Anyone may be Advisor for a JEP,
though it should be someone familiar enough either with the subject matter, or the Jenkins project,
or the JEP workflow to effectively guide the JEP to completion.

A JEP may have more than one Advisor.
There might be no JEP advisor for JEPs submitted by experienced contributors
who are familiar with the Jenkins community and the JEP workflow.
For simplicity, this document uses the singular form.

==== Reviewer

A community entity or an individual contributor that reviews the JEP and makes an acceptance decision.
By default this role refers to the <<Jenkins community>> unless it makes a decision
to delegate the role to another community entity or individual contributor.
The delegation may be done only by the <<Jenkins community>> according to the decision making process,
and cannot be delegated further.
The <<Jenkins community>> is also eligible to revoke the delegation if it deems it nessessary.

NOTE: Before May 2021 the term referred to "the BDFL or BDFL Delegate that will review this JEP".

> This does no longer apply.

Author: > This delegation will be made, changed, or revoked only based on consensus of any interested members.  

I would like to reserve a right to remove the reviewer without consensus if the Jenkins community decides so. Consensus with the reviewer is not needed if the things become rough though I hope we will never need that

> This does no longer apply.

Reviewer: Updated.

> === Deprecated terms

Author: No strong opinion. I can even move it to the Change history section in the bottom. As long as the anchor is preserved, we are fine

> === Deprecated terms

Reviewer: Yes, let's put this under it's own heading in the Reasoning.

and the JEP workflow to effectively guide the JEP to completion.

A JEP may have more than one Advisor.
There might be no JEP advisor for JEPs submitted by experienced contributors
who are familiar with the Jenkins community and the JEP workflow.
For simplicity, this document uses the singular form.

==== Reviewer

The JEP Reviewer is a community entity or an individual contributor that reviews the JEP and makes an acceptance decision.
By default this role refers to the <<Jenkins community>> unless it makes a decision
to delegate the role to another community entity or individual contributor.
The delegation may be done only by the <<Jenkins community>> according to the decision making process,
and cannot be delegated further.
The <<Jenkins community>> is also eligible to revoke the delegation if it deems it nessessary.

NOTE: Before May 2021 the term referred to "the BDFL or BDFL Delegate that will review this JEP".
This does no longer apply.

=== Deprecated terms

There are terms which were used in previous editions of the JEP,
but they are no longer applied in the modern version of the process.
The terms are listed here for historical reference reasons.

==== Sponsor

> The term is replaced by _Champion_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The term is replaced by <<Champion>>.
```

  When Andrea believes the JEP is stable,
  addresses all major design and scope questions,
  and represents the consensus of the community,
  she then asks the <<Jenkins community>> to review the JEP for Acceptance.
  This happens in the main Jenkins developer list,
  and the message should reference the JEP discussion channel.

. **<<review, Review>>** - any interested members of <<Jenkins community>> review the JEP
  and any related discussions and implementation. 
  Alternatively, if the <<Reviewer>> role had been delegated to another entity then they would also perform a review. 
  All Reviewers agree with Andrea that consensus has been reached regarding the JEP
  and that the implementation is far enough along to enusure that
  the design is stable and complete.
  This decision is made in a publicly traceable form.
  Andrea announces the decision in the discussion channel defined for the JEP,
  and explicitly sets the final response timeout (see <<accepted>>),

>   e.g. by saying "this JEP might be accepted in 7 calendar days unless there is unaddressed negative feedback".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  e.g. by saying "this JEP will be accepted in 7 calendar days unless there is additional feedback".
```

Author: Do you agree with the comment @bitwiseman ?

the JEP process is run by
link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consensus_decision-making[consensus].
It is the responsibility of every contributor to respect other contributors,
listen to their perspectives, and attempt to find solutions that work for everyone.
The link:https://www.jenkins.io/project/conduct/[Jenkins Code of Conduct] applies
to all sides and to all aspects of the JEP process.

If consensus cannot be achieved on a JEP,
contributors may request that the <<reviewer, JEP Reviewer>> intervene.
The reviewer will consider the matter, and render their decision,
including describing what actions will be taken and documenting their reasoning.

If contributors believe a decision made by the <<Reviewer>> runs counter to the best interests to Jenkins project,
they may request the <<Jenkins community>> to review the decision.
Also, they may do in the case of the  the overall JEP process disputes (rather than one specific JEP).
The community or, if needed, the Jenkins Governance Board,
will take up the matter and render a decision within a reasonable timeframe.
Similar to the judiciary, the community will _not_ make technical decisions,

> they will only affirm or reject the Reviewer's decision.

Reviewer: This part of the process needs more rewriting.
Not sure how to phrase it yet though.

=== Reporting JEP Bugs, or Submitting JEP Updates

The process for reporting a bug or submitting a JEP update depends on several factors,
such as the maturity of the JEP, the preferences of the JEP champion, and the nature
of the comments. For the early draft stages of the JEP, it's probably best to
send  comments and changes directly to the JEP champion. For more mature, or
finished JEPs consider submitting corrections to the JEP repository
footnoteref:[repo] or the Jenkins issue tracker
footnoteref:[issues,https://issues.jenkins-ci.org].  If the JEP champion is a
Jenkins developer, assign the bug/patch to them, otherwise assign it to a JEP
editor.

When in doubt about where to send changes, please check first
with the JEP champion and/or a JEP editor.

Even JEP champions with git push privileges for the JEP repository should submit
via Pull Request, with the exception of status or resolution updates
which may be pushed directly given the change was already discussed
and agreed to elsewhere.

[[transferring]]

> === Transferring JEP Championship

Reviewer: Championship should mean the same a Sponsorship, but it doesn't quite. 

```suggestion
=== Transferring JEP Champion role
```

=== Limits of BDFL model

> During the original discussion of the JEP process in 2017,

Reviewer: I'd prefer to make a new heading for the switch from BDFL and leave this section mostly unchanged.

* link:https://groups.google.com/d/msg/jenkinsci-dev/spDAr8EJm3c/T9Nmhn-fAQAJ[Request for feedback: Jenkins Enhancement Proposal]
* link:https://groups.google.com/d/topic/jenkinsci-dev/tw0ETwvboAM/discussion[Modification of "Accepted" JEPs]
* link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/hepntz6WZak[Changes in the JEP process and the BDFL role] (2020-2021)

=== Pull Requests

Initial release:

* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/1[PR 1]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/12[PR 12]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/19[PR 19]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/76[PR 76]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/359[PR 359] 
```

* link:https://groups.google.com/d/msg/jenkinsci-dev/spDAr8EJm3c/T9Nmhn-fAQAJ[Request for feedback: Jenkins Enhancement Proposal]
* link:https://groups.google.com/d/topic/jenkinsci-dev/tw0ETwvboAM/discussion[Modification of "Accepted" JEPs]
* link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/hepntz6WZak[Changes in the JEP process and the BDFL role] (2020-2021)

=== Pull Requests

Initial release:

* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/1[PR 1]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/12[PR 12]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/19[PR 19]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/76[PR 76]

== Change history

This section lists major changes in this process JEP.

=== May TODO, 2021

JEP-1 was modified according to the discussion in link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/hepntz6WZak[this thread] and the Jenkins governance meeting.

> Key changes:

Reviewer 2: the tl;dr for those of us who are not lawyers

Author: ```suggestion
The goal is to simplify the process by removing the BDFL delegation bottleneck and adopting the standard community decision making process instead.

Key changes:
```

Does it work for you @jglick ?

Reviewer 2: Sure, looks fine

* link:https://groups.google.com/d/msg/jenkinsci-dev/spDAr8EJm3c/T9Nmhn-fAQAJ[Request for feedback: Jenkins Enhancement Proposal]
* link:https://groups.google.com/d/topic/jenkinsci-dev/tw0ETwvboAM/discussion[Modification of "Accepted" JEPs]
* link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/hepntz6WZak[Changes in the JEP process and the BDFL role] (2020-2021)

=== Pull Requests

Initial release:

* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/1[PR 1]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/12[PR 12]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/19[PR 19]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/76[PR 76]

> == Change history

Author: I would prefer to have it in the bottom for process JEPs which may change from time to time. Happy to create a separate PR to the JEP-1 and the template to make it standard. WDYT?
